📖  Add API conventions (#5304)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: CONTRIBUTING.md

discretion of the project's maintainers, and must be carefully considered before merging. An example of an allowed
breaking change might be a fix for a behavioral bug that was released in an initial minor version (such as `v0.3.0`).

## API conventions

> In general we adhere to the [Kubernetes API conventions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#optional-vs-required).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project follows the [Kubernetes API conventions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#optional-vs-required). Minor modifications or additions to the conventions are listed below.
```

> We have a small set of exceptions due to the fact that we're using CRDs while the API conventions predates the introduction 
> of CRDs and the way our controllers only patch actual changes to the status instead of updating the entire status in every 
> reconciliation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Optional vs. Required

> Status fields must be optional, because our controllers are patching selected fields instead of updating the entire status 
> in every reconciliation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Status fields MUST be optional. 
  Our controllers are patching selected fields instead of updating the entire status in every reconciliation.
```

> in every reconciliation.

Reviewer 2: Is that true? I thought a patch could patch any set of fields without needing to worry about the others, this is why there are different types of merge patches right? 

I don't know that I've seen this requirement defined anywhere else before, is there some source that lead you to this? Might be worth linking it here for a cross reference

Author: @vincepri can you please provide some additional context?

Reviewer: > Is that true? I thought a patch could patch any set of fields without needing to worry about the others, this is why there are different types of merge patches right?

This is correct, and that's also why it might fail validation if a field is required. If you have a field is required, and it never gets set during let's say one of the first reconciliation (example: we're waiting for external objects to reconcile first), the api server is going to refuse any patches that doesn't have the said required field

Author: If someone else is curious, if a new required field would be added (but not set with patch), the error returned by the patchHelper looks roughly like this:
```bash
Cluster.cluster.x-k8s.io "quick-start-7x5iac" is invalid: [status.requiredBool: Required value, status.requiredBoolPointer: Required value]
```

Reviewer 2: Today I learned! Thanks for the info and trying it out. I wonder if this is documented somewhere that we could link to back up this statement 🤔

Optional fields have the following properties:

> * In general an optional field must have both an `+optional` marker and an `omitempty` JSON tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An optional field MUST be marked with `+optional` and include an `omitempty` JSON tag.
```

> * If the semantic difference between nil and the zero value is important for your code, the field must also be a pointer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fields SHOULD be pointers if the nil and the zero values (by Go standards) have semantic differences.
```

>   * Note: This doesn't apply to map or slice types as they already have a built-in `nil` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Note: This doesn't apply to map or slice types as they are assignable to `nil`.
```

Author: Isn't it rather the other way around `nil` is assignable to map or slice?

Reviewer: Either way works, a variable of type map can be assigned `= nil`, and `nil` is assignable to maps and slices

Author: I think it's more my understanding of the english language that's the problem :). I'll fix it

Reviewer: Feel free to keep it as-is, I reworded to be more concise, not because what you wrote is incorrect

>   * Example: When using ClusterClass, the semantic difference is important when you have a field in a template which will 
>     have instance-specific different values in derived objects. Because in this case it's possible to set the field to `nil`
>     in the template and then the value can be set in derived objects without being overwritten by the cluster topology controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example 
When using ClusterClass, the semantic difference is important when you have a field in a template which will 
    have instance-specific different values in derived objects. Because in this case it's possible to set the field to `nil`
    in the template and then the value can be set in derived objects without being overwritten by the cluster topology controller.
```

> * Exceptions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Exceptions
```

  * Fields in root objects should be kept as scaffolded by kubebuilder, e.g.:
    ```golang
    type Machine struct {
      metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
      metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

      Spec   MachineSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
      Status MachineStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
    }
    type MachineList struct {
      metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
      metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
      Items           []Machine `json:"items"`
    }
    ```
  * Top-level fields in `status` must always have the `+optional` annotation. If we want the field to be always visible even if it 
    has the zero value, it must **not** have the `omitempty` JSON tag, e.g.:
    * Replica counters like `availableReplicas` in the `MachineDeployment`
    * Flags expressing progress in the object lifecycle like `infrastructureReady` in `Machine`

### CRD additionalPrinterColumns

> All our CRD objects should have the following `additionalPrinterColumns` order (if the respective field exists in the CRD):

Reviewer: Do we have to force ordering?

Author: We don't have to. I personally think it's great if we can avoid that our CRDs have different columns orders, because it's easier to read that way.

* Namespace (added automatically)
* Name (added automatically)
* Cluster
* Other fields
* Replica-related fields
* Phase

> * Age (mandatory field for all CRDs)

Reviewer 2: Is it worth including examples of how this would be added, eg the appropriate kubebuilder tags?

Author: I could, although our types have a lot of examples.

What do you think about adding a short node that those are configured with `+kubebuilder:printcolumn` annotations and that there are a lot of examples available in the `api` package?

Reviewer 2: Yeah that makes sense to me, let's add the note

Author: Done

discretion of the project's maintainers, and must be carefully considered before merging. An example of an allowed
breaking change might be a fix for a behavioral bug that was released in an initial minor version (such as `v0.3.0`).

## API conventions

> This project follows the [Kubernetes API conventions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#optional-vs-required). Minor modifications or additions to the conventions are listed below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This project follows the [Kubernetes API conventions](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md). Minor modifications or additions to the conventions are listed below.
```

assuming we're talking about the entire doc, not just optional vs required

Author: Absolutely, fixed. thx

> ### Optional vs. Required

Reviewer 4: can we mention that fields that are conceptually required when are pointers and defaulted are marked as //+optional because of a technical limitation. i.e CRDs don't publish defaults, so client side validation (e.g kubectl) breaks if the field is given empty input because it does not know that it would be defaulted on the server.

Author: Yes. I assume you're referring to cases like this? https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/4527
(I'll then use it as example)

Author: I would add the following:
> * If a field is required (for our controllers to work) and has a default value, but we don't want to force users to set the field, we have to 
>  mark the field as optional. Otherwise the client-side kubectl OpenAPI schema validation will force the user to set it even though it would be
>  defaulted on the server-side.

I'm not entirely sure about how we should make the field optional. I think I would only add the `+optonal` annotation as that's the closes to how a required field should look like. This is not necessary consistent with our current fields (e.g. `MachineDeployment.Spec.MachineDeploymentStrategy`)

Any thoughts? (@enxebre @vincepri @fabriziopandini)

Reviewer 5: Can we add this in a follow up PR (same as printing status vs intent) ?

Author: Moved to https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/5333

* Status fields MUST be optional. Our controllers are patching selected fields instead of updating the entire status in every reconciliation.

Optional fields have the following properties:
* An optional field MUST be marked with `+optional` and include an `omitempty` JSON tag.
* Fields SHOULD be pointers if the nil and the zero values (by Go standards) have semantic differences.

>   * Note: This doesn't apply to map or slice types as they are assignable to `nil`.

Reviewer 3: should we just avoid maps in general? https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#lists-of-named-subobjects-preferred-over-maps

Author: In general yes, but there are exceptions like `The only exceptions are pure maps in the API (currently, labels, selectors, annotations, data)`

#### Exceptions

* Fields in root objects should be kept as scaffolded by kubebuilder, e.g.:
  ```golang
  type Machine struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    Spec   MachineSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
    Status MachineStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
  }
  type MachineList struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
    Items           []Machine `json:"items"`
  }
  ```

* Top-level fields in `status` must always have the `+optional` annotation. If we want the field to be always visible even if it 
  has the zero value, it must **not** have the `omitempty` JSON tag, e.g.:
  * Replica counters like `availableReplicas` in the `MachineDeployment`
  * Flags expressing progress in the object lifecycle like `infrastructureReady` in `Machine`

### CRD additionalPrinterColumns

All our CRD objects should have the following `additionalPrinterColumns` order (if the respective field exists in the CRD):
* Namespace (added automatically)
* Name (added automatically)
* Cluster
* Other fields

> * Replica-related fields

Reviewer 4: do we may be want to recommend printing status vs intent?

Author: Good question.

Context: Afaik we cannot have columns based on multiple values, e.g. Kubernetes Pod 4/5 containers are ready.

 think the only thing we can do is try to avoid misunderstandings if something is spec or status through good column names. Let's see what we currently have:
* I think for a lot of columns it doesn't really matter: e.g.: Cluster, Age, NodeName
* It seems like our replica columns are also easy to understand: Replicas is .spec.Replicas and all others are from status, e.g. Ready, Updated, Unavailable
* Similar for our "object lifecycle flags", like: Initialized, API Server Available

I think the main problem is when, based on the column name, the column could be spec or status and if the status could be different from spec until the object is entirely reconciled. For me that's mostly `Version` (although the MHC fields and columns could also need some improvement => https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/5291).

Regarding `Version`: One idea to clear this up would be to rename the column in cases where it's not clear to something like `SPEC_VERSION` or `DESIRED_VERSION` (I don't have good ideas :)). I think this would apply to `Cluster` and `MachineDeployment` (Machines only ever have one version and afaik MachineSets to (?)).

But back to topic, I'm not entirely sure what the convention could or should be. I think for me it would be let's try to make clear through the column name if something is spec or status for fields where they could be misunderstandings.

Author: I would add the following:
> **NOTE**: In cases where it's not clear if the column field is part of spec or status, we SHOULD try to make it obvious by choosing the column name accordingly.

Regarding `VERSION`. Should we make a change to the `VERSION` column of Cluster and MachineDeployment before the v1beta1 release? As mentioned, my best idea for another name is probably `DESIRED_VERSION` (alternative `SPEC_VERSION`).

@enxebre @vincepri @fabriziopandini WDYT?

Author: Moved to: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/5332
